Portfolio of Data Displays
================

![](resources/cm402-header.png) <small> <br> <i>Lastfm Graph</i> by
kjell is licensed under
<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/0/">CC BY-SA
2.0</a> <br> </small>

This portfolio showcases my skill in clear data visualization and
ethical visual rhetoric. It is the culmination of my work in the class
ME447 Visualising Data. Each display required creating one or more
graphics and writing an essay on the data characteristics and my
decisions on how to graph it effectively. This class focused on visual
rhetoric, which is essentially the process of tailoring graphic
decisions to your audience with the goals of clarity and truthfulness.

All of the work done here is using R, a programming language for data
manipulation and visualization. At the beginning of this class I did not
know what R was, and at the end I am proficient in using it and have
created all the displays below.

Gabe Severyn - June 2020

## Displays and critiques

[Display 1](reports/D1-report.md) Student demographics and post
graduation earnings at US colleges This strip plot explores the
demographics entering US colleges and their earnings

[Display 2](reports/D2-report.md) US commercial vessels are antiquated A
multiway reveals a much stronger story than a data table

[Display 3](reports/D3-report.md) Low price and high fuel economy are
mutually exclusive This scatterplot shows the inverse relationship of
these two variables

[Display 4](reports/D4-report.md) Motorsports safety improvements are
accelerating An ethical display of fatalities in racing, and the
equipment that prevents them

[Display 5](reports/D5-report.md) Motorization rate disparity Stripping
away visual complexity in search of lessons in the data
