Low price and high fuel economy are mutually exclusive
================

There is a strongly inverse correlation between vehicle price and
highway fuel economy. Of the cars imported into the US in 1985, there
were not expensive cars that achieved good fuel economy nor were there
inexpensive cars with poor fuel economy (Dua and Graff,
[2017](#ref-Dua:2017)).

<img src="../figures/D3-scatterplot-imports.png" width="100%" />

An explanation of the trend can be traced back to companies producing
products that satisfy consumer preferences. Simply put, brands make cars
people want to buy. The explanation make sense from the view of the
producer targeting potential consumers. No conclusions can be made about
which vehicles actually appealed to consumers and sold, since this data
does not include sales or profit information.

Sedan and hatchbacks and wagons strongly exhibit an inverse correlation
between price and economy. A budget conscious shopper prioritizes low
overall costs: made up of both initial price and operating costs in
fuel. Hatchbacks are the lowest cost style of car, and also have some of
the highest fuel economy numbers.

Buyers of more expensive cars have different priorities than those of
hatchbacks and sedans. All of the vehicles around and above the $30,000
are Porsche, a luxury-performance brand, or Mercedes-Benz, the
gold-standard of luxury cars. Buyers willing to spend that much prefer
cars to be comfortable, have a certain status, or have high performance.
Overall, there was no real correlation between fuel economy and country
of origin, which was explored.

There are a few contextual issues with this data. It does not represent
domestic manufacturers well, because any american models are merely
captive-imports: models built by overseas manufactures but sold under
domestic brands. For inexplicable reasons it does not include trucks
either. The US was the largest automobile market at at the time, so the
trends seen in this data likely represent the global trends.

Extending this data to include domestic cars may provide additional
context to this story. Perhaps foreign companies produce more economical
cars because the domestic producers are leaving that market segment
empty. This story would be dramatically different with data from current
years (post 2010). Both because automotive market segments are more
diverse than ever, and because of recent focus on fuel efficiency and
electrification. How would current market trends compare to those of
1985? Do current luxury cars still get poor fuel economy? As always,
there are more questions than answers.

## Graph design

A scatterplot is appropriate for this data because the main interest is
showing the correlation between two continuous quantitative varibles
(Doumont, [2009](#ref-Doumont:2009)). Body style and country of origin
are ancillary variables, included for context and to further the story
but they play second fiddle to the scatterplot correlation.

Both factors are ordered by economy, which easily shows which style and
brand are the most efficient. Ordering the panels by increasing median
economy is more effective than ordering the styles alphabetically
(Robbins, [2013](#ref-Robbins:2013b)).

This graphic uses the standard theme as discussed in the [D2
report](https://github.com/severygb/portfolio-severyn-gabe/blob/master/reports/D2-report.md).
Price is formatted in currency form, which enables immediate
understanding. Care was taken to eliminate label overprinting by
changing the axis scale to thousands, eliminating all of the trailing
zeros. Much of the data in hatchback and sedan is closely clustered, so
a slight transparency is added to the points.

One of Wainer’s sarcastic visualization rules is “emphasize the trivial,
ignore the important” (Wainer, [2000](#ref-Wainer:2000)). He means to
place important comparisons such that they are easy to make. To
facilitate comparing mileage across each body style, it is placed on the
y-axis, which is common for all facets. Additionally, body style is a
more important factor in correlating price and economy so it is
separated as panels, while country of origin is relegated to colors
because it is secondary.

I continue to have good luck and pick
[datasets](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Automobile) with very
little missing data. Of the variables used in this display, only price
contains missing values (4 in 205 observations, 2%). The spine chart
below shows that the missing values are split between the most common
body styles (hatchback and sedan). From this, we conclude the missing
values are not biased to a certain body style and do not significantly
change the visual story.

<img src="../figures/D3-missing-values.png" width="60%" />

The few problematic observations are omitted from the graph.

Pulled from a repository for machine learning, this data set strongly
resembles the mtcars data included in R. This was not intentional, I
just sought out data on cars because that’s what I am interested in, and
found the similarity through tutorials that used mtcars.

## References

<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-Doumont:2009">

Doumont J-L (2009) Designing the graph. *Trees, maps, and theorems:
Effective communication for rational minds*. Principiae, Kraainem,
Belgium, 133–143 <http://www.treesmapsandtheorems.com/>

</div>

<div id="ref-Dua:2017">

Dua D and Graff C (2017) UCI machine learning repository automobile data
set. <https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Automobile>

</div>

<div id="ref-Robbins:2013b">

Robbins N (2013) Scales. *Creating More Effective Graphs*. Chart House,
Wayne, NJ, 226–291
<http://www.nbr-graphs.com/resources/recommended-books/>

</div>

<div id="ref-Wainer:2000">

Wainer H (2000) *Visual revelations: Graphical tales of fate and
deception from napoleon bonaparte to ross perot.*
(doi:[10.2307/2685574](https://doi.org/10.2307/2685574))

</div>

</div>
