Motorsports safety improvements are accelerating
================

There are three primary threats to a driver: high g-load, object
intrusion, and fire. (Smith, [2019](#ref-Smith:2019))

<img src="../figures/D3-scatterplot-imports.png" width="100%" />

Racing safety advances: HANS devices widely mandated. 2000-2003, (Tyler,
[2006](#ref-Tyler:2006)) nomex fire suits 1964 (Houston,
[2012](#ref-Houston:2012)) SAFER barriers a.k.a. ‘soft’ walls, 2002
(Valentine, [2016](#ref-Valentine:2016)) driver restraint systems Carbon
fiber monocoque in 1981 by McLaren (Piola, [2016](#ref-Piola:2016))
roll-over hoops mandated at Indy 500 (Nye, [2017](#ref-Nye:2017)) seat
belts / harnesses, 1957-1963. (Nye, [2017](#ref-Nye:2017))

Not labeled but derseves a mention: helmet improvements, intrusion
mitigators (F1 Aeroscreen and Halo)

There is a story here that this graph does not address - the data I
obtained makes no distinction between professional and amateur drivers.
A national or international series, such as NASCAR or F1, has the
resources and knowledge to drive advancements in safety technology, and
the ability to mandate equipment within the series. Professional and
manufacture-backed teams have enough budget to afford the safest
equipment available. Amateur racing is the exact opposite.

Drivers and teams at local race tracks can not afford top-tier
equipment. Local tracks can not afford to fit energy-absorbing wall
material at a cost upwards of $500 a foot (Smith,
[2019](#ref-Smith:2019)).

There has been a trickle-down effect for safety improvements, especially
in helmets, restraint harnesses, fuel cells, and the knowledge to build
a strong driver protection cabin. Even the budget-centric racing series
24 Hours of LeMons, where cars must cost below $500, enforces *strict*
safety protocols for crash safety and fire prevention.

Only in the 1990’s did people and series begin to look at crashes and
injuries in a scientific manner, searching for safety improvements and
studying how to mitigate risks (Tyler, [2006](#ref-Tyler:2006)).

## Graph design

Data requirements

  - Minimum 100 observations
  - Two quantitative variables
  - One categorical variable with at least 5 levels
  - Time is excluded as a variable

Why is this graph type appropriate? design decisions, especially citing
humanizing the content

## References

<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-Houston:2012">

Houston R (2012) Dressing the part \[archived\].
<https://web.archive.org/web/20121011234900/http://www.nascar.com/news/121009/ups-game-changer-uniforms/index.html>

</div>

<div id="ref-Nye:2017">

Nye D (2017) Doug nye: How safety has advanced in motorsport.
<https://www.goodwood.com/grr/columnists/doug-nye/2017/6/doug-nye-how-safety-has-advanced-in-motorsport/>

</div>

<div id="ref-Piola:2016">

Piola G (2016) Tech analysis: The key safety advances that saved
alonso’s life.
<https://www.motorsport.com/f1/news/tech-analysis-the-key-safety-advances-that-saved-alonso-s-life-682435/682435/?nrt=54>

</div>

<div id="ref-Smith:2019">

Smith SC (2019) Motorsports safety: What’s next?
<https://www.automobilemag.com/news/motorsports-safety-past-present-future-intrusion-fire-g-loads/>

</div>

<div id="ref-Tyler:2006">

Tyler M (2006) The history of the hans device as told by dr. Bob hubbard
\[archived\].
<https://web.archive.org/web/20080104173743/http://www.catchfence.com/html/2006/mt032706.html>

</div>

<div id="ref-Valentine:2016">

Valentine R (2016) Car racing is deadly. This is how we keep drivers
alive. <https://time.com/4546783/auto-racing-barrier-deaths/>

</div>

</div>
