
## Week 6 reading prompts

Dragga, Sam & Dan Voss (2001) Cruel pies: The inhumanity of technical
illustrations. *Technical Communication* 48(3): 265–274.

**Prompt:** Explain how the prevalent treatment of ethics in visual
communication is lacking.

**Response:** All previous research and literature on ethical graphics
focuses on correctly representing numerical data, and preventing
misleading conclusions. Even if the graphic is true, and not misleading
in any way, it can still turn the subject into nothing more than
statistics.

**Prompt:** Explain the purpose of “humanizing” data displays depicting
human suffering or death.

**Response:** As humans, we have the capacity for compassion and
empathy, and those feelings have the unique ability to drive us to
action. When we see a graphic about fatalities or injuries, we are meant
to take away a drive to action, to improve the situation or help those
affected.

**Prompt:** Consider the authors’ attempts at redesigning such data
displays. Did one in particular strike you as ineffective? Explain

**Response:** The author’s redesign of Minard’s depiction of Napoleons’s
casualties did not seem poingnant. Placing figures of soldiers and
gravestones to depict the army size and casualties makes the graphic
look more like a game of Risk, and not like thousands of men perishing.

**Prompt:** Did one in particular strike you as effective? Explain.

**Response:** The most effective humanizing redesign is Figure 11:
injuries related to baby walkers. The child in the walker has a clear
progression from top of stairs to ambulance, without appearing humorous
or light hearted, but also not being graphic or gruesome.

## Week 4 Reading Prompts

Wainer, Howard (2014) Fifteen displays about one thing. In: *Medical
illuminations: Using evidence, visualization, and statistical thinking
to improve healthcare.* UK: Oxford University Press, 32–49.

Definition: “Gram staining” (named after its inventor, the Danish
scientist Hans Christian Gram) is a method of staining to distinguish
one type of bacterium from another—it can be used as a faster substitute
for culturing. Gram staining is a category with two levels: some
bacteria are Gram stain negative and some are Gram stain positive. Read
more about it on the  
[Gram stain Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gram_stain).

**Prompt:** Reviewing the article carefully, come up with a list of
variables. Classify each as quantitative or categorical, and if
categorical, the levels.

**Response:**

variable name: Antibiotic

  - type: Categorical
  - levels (if categorical): 3. Penicillin, Streptomycin, Neomycin

variable name: Bacterium

  - type: Categorical
  - levels (if categorical): 16 examples of bacteria species

variable name: Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)

  - type: Quantitative continuous

variable name: Gram staining

  - type: Categorical
  - levels (if categorical): 2: Positive and Negative

**Prompt:** The article title is “Fifteen displays about one thing.”
After reading the entire article, what is the “one thing?” Note that the
“one thing” might imply multiple goals or more than one question.

**Response:** Effectiveness of various antibiotics against a variety of
bacteria.

**Prompt:** In your opinion, which of the 15 displays best answers the
question(s) about the “one thing?”

**Response:** Entry 10 - Adding Words

**Prompt:** Explain why.

**Response:** For someone not deeply familiar with the concept of MIC,
words pointing out the most and least effective drugs is highly
informative. Grouping bacteria by Gram staining shows the slight inverse
correlation between Penicillin and the other two. Connecting the dots
into lines is not advised here, because the x axis is a categorical
variable, and a line implies an order or trend between the types of
bacteria, when there is no order or meaning to the order. No matter
which convention you use (bigger is better or opposite), clearly label
or show the meaning.

**Prompt:** Re-read Wainer’s conclusion section. What main points does
he make about graph design or visual rhetoric that you could apply to
your own work this term.

**Response:** The most effictive data display depends on the question to
be answered. Seeing general trends or comparing individual numbers will
result in a drastically different graph. In this class, the graph and
question need to be tightly intertwined. Data displays are heavily
influenced by audience analysis, and anticipating what questions they
want answered by your chart.

## Week 2 Reading prompts

Tufte, Edward (1997) The decision to launch the space shuttle
Challenger. In: *Visual and statistical thinking: Displays of evidence
for making decisions.* Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press, 16–31.

**Prompt:** Tufte says, “Regardless of the indirect cultural causes of
the accident, there was a clear proximate cause.” Summarize Tufte’s
explanation of the proximate cause.

**Response:** The engineers correctly concluded that lower temperatures
cause the rubber o-rings to lose resiliency, which can potentially lead
to seal failures. The evidence they presented to NASA and management was
muddled with irrelevent data and unclear graphs. Unclear visual evidence
misled the decision makers and did not convey the link between low
temperatures and seal failures.

**Prompt:** Describe the evidence the author presents to support those
ideas.

**Response:** Data from all previous launches ordered by temperature
shows a clear trend in o-ring damage: colder launches resulted in more
seal damage. Tufte shows the graphs and charts presented by the
engineers, which are unhelpful and bury important information.

**Prompt:** What data were used in making the decision to launch? What
data were not used but should have been used (according to Tufte) in
making the launch decision?

**Response:** Data for blow-by was presented, which is not the failure
mechanism they are interested in. Charts and tables refer to data from
qualification rockets, which is not a valid comparison because those
rockets are not flying. None of this data should have been used in the
decision making, and it only muddied the water. Data from successful
launches was not used, bue should have because it establishes an
accurate comparison for flights with seal damage.

**Prompt:** On page 23, Tufte presents a graph that provides visual
evidence that the “launch was completely outside the engineering
database accumulated in 24 previous flight.” Describe the structure of
this data set:

  - Number of observations
  - Data structure: classify each variable as quantitative (continuous
    or discrete) and categorical (nominal or ordinal and number of
    levels).

**Response:** It included 23 observations (24 total flights occurred,
but one rocket was not recovered). The calculated variable ‘o-ring
damage index’ is quantitative continuous. Launch temperature is
quantitative continuous data. He also included the forecasted
temperature range on launch day to illustrate how far it was from proven
conditions.

**Prompt:** Summarize the main thesis of the paper.

**Response:** The Challenger launch decision was flawed by poor visual
rhetoric, unclear evidence, and lacking logical analysis that obscured
the intended message
